iRODS 5 updates - configuration, process model, installation, genquery, etc. (main) (#338)
irods/irods_docs: docs/system_overview/configuration.md

#

> The following configuration files control nearly all aspects of how an iRODS deployment functions. All JSON files validate against the  [configuration schemas in each installation](https://github.com/irods/irods/tree/main/schemas/configuration/v5).

Author: `main` -> `5.0.0`

Reviewer: one reason to leave it as main might be that we tweak something after release, and then we don't have to remember to come back here and touch the link.

Author: True, but that also has the downside of making admins aware of properties their version doesn't support. They may be running iRODS 5, but looking at a schema for 6.0 without knowing it.

Reviewer: oh.. so then we have a stable branch...   i was just hesitating on the very specific tag link that you had suggested.

Author: Leaving as is. We can adjust the links once 6.0 becomes a thing.

## /etc/irods/server_config.json

> This file defines the behavior of the server-side processes that answer incoming requests coming into iRODS. It is created and populated by the installer package.

Author: `the installer package` -> `setup_irods.py`

Author: Done.

> This file defines the behavior of the server-side processes that answer incoming requests coming into iRODS. It is created and populated by the installer package.

Author: Done.

> iRODS 5 servers only require a working server_config.json file. All server properties which existed in the service account user's irods_environment.json file have been provided via the server_config.json file.

Author: Rephrase this statement.

Author: Done.

> iRODS 5 servers only require a working server_config.json file. All server properties which existed in the service account user's irods_environment.json file have been provided via the server_config.json file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
iRODS 5 servers only require a working `server_config.json` file. All server properties which existed in prior versions of the service account's `irods_environment.json` file have been incorporated into `server_config.json`.
```

Author: Done.

    // See "Checksum Configuration" for more details.
    "default_hash_scheme": "SHA256",

>     // Encyption properties used for parallel transfer.

Reviewer 2: As I recall, if these are not properly configured, the client is not able to communicate with the server at all. In other words, I don't think this is only for parallel transfer encryption. I could be wrong.

>     // Encyption properties used for parallel transfer.

Author: Those properties are required when using TLS. I don't know if they are required for legacy parallel transfer.

We're going to need to verify the requirements. I'm going to relax the wording for now and open an issue to revisit it. The docs can be updated post 5.0.

>     // Encyption properties used for parallel transfer.

Author: Did a quick grep of the iRODS server and spotted use of the encryption algorithm in parallel transfer code and TLS code.

Decided to add TLS to the wording. Still going to open an issue so we confirm things.

>     // Encyption properties used for parallel transfer.

Author: Created #345.

>     // Encyption properties used for parallel transfer.

Author: Updated wording.

    // value in the TCP specification is 7200 seconds (2 hours). An idle connection is terminated after approximately an
    // additional 11 minutes (9 probes at an interval of 75 seconds apart) when keep-alive is enabled. For more details,
    // see:
    // - man tcp
    // - https://tldp.org/HOWTO/TCP-Keepalive-HOWTO/usingkeepalive.html
    //
    // If this option is not set or set to a non-positive value, the socket option for TCP_KEEPIDLE will remain unset.
    // This means that the value of tcp_keepalive_time in use for the kernel configuration will be used for iRODS
    // sockets using TCP keepalive. The range of acceptable values is defined by the range of acceptable values for the
    // TCP_KEEPIDLE option. If a value outside of the acceptable range is provided, an error will be returned and the
    // socket will be closed.
    //
    // -1 indicates that the socket option should remain unset.
    "tcp_keepalive_time_in_seconds": -1,

    // (Optional)
    // Defines client-side TLS configurations. Although the "tls_client" object itself is optional,

>     // all sub-properties are required if "tls_client" is defined.

Reviewer 2: Looks like only "verify_server" is required. The other two are marked optional.

Author: Fixed.

$ kill -HUP $(cat /var/run/irods/irods-server.pid)
```

> The following configuration properties require a full restart of the server to take effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates to the following configuration properties require a full restart of the server to take effect.
```

Author: Done.

```json
{
    "advanced_settings": {
        "dns_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes": 5000000
        },
        "hostname_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes": 2500000
        }
    }
}

> ```

Author: The integer values for each property may lead to confusion. Perhaps it's better to list the properties as JSON pointers?
```
- /advanced_settings/dns_cache/shared_memory_size_in_bytes
- /advanced_settings/hostname_cache/shared_memory_size_in_bytes
```

Reviewer: do people use that enough?   what are you concerned is confusing about the actual JSON?

Author: I'm looking at the values of the properties. They are just ... there.

Could replace those with something like `...` to signal that the values aren't the important bit.

Reviewer: oh i see... yes, you can probably just list them as pointers.   i think that's okay here.

are there only two?

Author: Those two options plus the access time options in R_GRID_CONFIGURATION.

So, there's a total of six options.

Reviewer: okay, so maybe we make a section/statement that clearly talks about 'restart-required' configuration settings... and then we will have a full accounting in one place we can point to when someone inevitably asks.

Author: Can also just drop the values, leaving just the property names.

With JavaScript highlighting. This is ok, but feels a little weird.
```js
{
    "advanced_settings": {
        "dns_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes"
        },
        "hostname_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes"
        }
    }
}
```

With JSON highlighting. This is likely to be closer to what we can expect when rendered. That is, the inner-most property is treated as a string instead of a property name.
```json
{
    "advanced_settings": {
        "dns_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes"
        },
        "hostname_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes"
        }
    }
}
```

And here's a version using `...`.
```js
{
    "advanced_settings": {
        "dns_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes": // ...
        },
        "hostname_cache": {
            "shared_memory_size_in_bytes": // ...
        }
    }
}
```

Or we go with the JSON pointer style and just mention the properties are using JSON pointer syntax. Can even link to documentation about JSON pointers for people who are unfamiliar with them.

Author: > okay, so maybe we make a section/statement that clearly talks about 'restart-required' configuration settings... and then we will have a full accounting in one place we can point to when someone inevitably asks.

Sounds good.

Reviewer: > Or we go with the JSON pointer style and just mention the properties are using JSON pointer syntax. Can even link to documentation about JSON pointers for people who are unfamiliar with them.

This feels the cleanest... having the JSON not be actual JSON looks weird/broken.

Author: Ok. Going with JSON pointers.

Author: Done.

This is the main iRODS configuration file defining the iRODS environment. Any changes are effective immediately since iCommands reload their environment on every execution.

> The server no longer relies on information defined in this file.

Author: Consider putting this in a `!!!` block.

Author: Done.

    // certificates. Use the ‘c_rehash’ utility to create the necessary links.
    "irods_ssl_ca_certificate_path": "",

    // (Optional)
    // Defines the level of server certificate authentication to perform.
    //
    // The following values are supported: none, cert, hostname
    //
    // When set to "none", authentication is skipped.
    //
    // When set to "cert", the server will verify that the certificate was signed by a trusted CA.
    //
    // When set to "hostname", the server will do everything defined by the "cert" level and then verify
    // that the FQDN of the iRODS server matches either the common name or one of the subjectAltNames in
    // the certificate.

>     "irods_ssl_verify_server": "hostname",

Author: Confirm `hostname` is the actual default.

Author: Out of scope for this PR. Will open an issue for this.

Author: Did some debugging with @alanking and discovered the following:
- The TLS code treats 0 as an error and 1 as success
- `hostname` is an implicit default - i.e. the value is never explicitly set to `hostname`
- `cert` isn't a real value - i.e. any value other than `none`, `hostname`, or empty string results in `cert` behavior
  - The iRODS 5 schema limits the values to `none`, `hostname`, and `cert` which is good

We think `hostname` is indeed the default. I'm going adjust the wording to use `implicit`.

Author: Will do.

Author: Thinking about this a little more, the current wording is fine because iRODS 5 doesn't allow anything other than the three values.

The behavior should be documented in the server code.
